Code book 
=================

This document provides information about the original source data as well as data generated by the script `run_analysis.R`, provided in this repository.

## Data

### Source Data - Feature Selection 
The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 
Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 
Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation
mad(): Median absolute deviation 
max(): Largest value in array
min(): Smallest value in array
sma(): Signal magnitude area
energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
iqr(): Interquartile range 
entropy(): Signal entropy
arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals
maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude
meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal 
kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal 
bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
angle(): Angle between to vectors.

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

gravityMean
tBodyAccMean
tBodyAccJerkMean
tBodyGyroMean
tBodyGyroJerkMean

The complete list of variables of each feature vector is available in 'features.txt'
Function `CleanAndAggregateStudy` takes a single parameter `calculateAverages` - a boolean defaulted to TRUE - which indicates whether the resultant tidy data should be aggregated by Test Subject and Activity.

	For more information read visit http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones


### Generated Data: `StudyAveragesTidy.csv`
The dataset `StudyAveragesTidy.csv` was generated by cleaning and aggregating data from an experiment in which measurements were collected from the accelerometer and gyroscope from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone used by 30 subjects carrying out a variety of 6 activities.
For your convenience we have included information about the original data in the section [Original data set](#original-data-set).

Here follows a description of what `StudyAveragesTidy.csv` looks like.

* The first variable `Subject` identifies the test subject under measurement. There are 30 subjects total.
* The second variable `Activity` defines the specific Activity involved in the measurement event. 

There are six Activities Total:

	1. WALKING
	2. WALKING_UPSTAIRS
	3. WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
	4. SITTING
	5. STANDING
	6. LAYING

Of the 561 variables in the original measurement data sets (`./UCI HAR Dataset/train/X_train.txt` and `./UCI HAR Dataset/test/X_test.txt`) only the 66 variables associated with the mean and standard deviation measurements are included. 
Column names were transformed to impove readability, specifically; the `"t"` & `"f"` prefixes were replaced by `"time_"` and `"freq_"` respectively, and instances of `"BodyBody"` has been simplified to `"Body"`.

The final transformation in the deliverable data set `StudyAveragesTidy.csv` involves grouping the Subject and Activity and then aggregating each row using the mean function. This yields 180 rows (30 Subjects by 6 Activities per Subject) comprising 81 columns (Subject, Activity, and 79 distinct measurements).  




